In order to understand morphology in the context of Natural Language Processing, one must first understand the concept of a morpheme. In linguistics, a morpheme represents the smallest unit of a language. Morphemes are not necessarily words, though in some instances a word may be a morpheme, however a morpheme doesn’t have to be “freestanding” in the same way that a word is. For example, the word “unbreakable” is comprised of three morphemes – un- (a bound morpheme that signifies “not”), -break- (the root, a free morpheme), and –able (a free morpheme signifying “can be done”). Morphology is simply the study of the structure of a word as a composition of morphemes, and is related to the rules of word formation.  

Morphological Analysis is important for a number of reasons. One reason is for the purposes of information retrieval – a query for cats should return matches for both cat and cats. Another is for language modeling. Once we have seen the word “itemize”, we can predict the word “itemized”. Morphological analysis is also essential for machine translation. The Spanish word gato corresponds to the English word cat. Further, morphological analysis is highly variable across languages, due to the amount of variation in each language itself. 

Morphological processes can be used to form new words. In derivation, a stem plus an affix are joined to example. For example, friend + ly = friendly, and unfriendly + ness = unfriendliness. In compounding, two stems are joined together. For example, the two stems wheel and chair form the compound word wheelchair. 
